- CQRS is a software pattern
that makes a lot of sense
for a microservices architecture
to improve performance.
Now, I've only seen this in theory.
It does have value in spending some time discussing it.
In a microservices architecture,
we usually build data services
that have specific functions.
They usually operate on a single data domain.
As such, they can be optimized for efficiencies.
We are usually dealing with CRUD operations
at first in the data services.
Over time, this can become problematic
in specific use cases.
Rights can be expensive in a traditional RDBMS especially.
This is important to note,
because we can tune a system only to a point,
when the update domain is different than the read domain.
Reads are not immediate or cheap,
especially when we need to massage the data.
If in fact, we find a domain,
whose data services need data being read
diverging from the data being written,
CQRS may be of help.
CQRS is a model that describes written data
in a different model than read data.
It is an acronym
for Command Query Responsibility Segregation.
It can be achieved
through an event-driven asynchronous architecture.
Hence, why we are discussing it here.
It tends to be focused on microservices architectures,
but they are not required.
Likewise, they are not restricted to microservices.
It is important to note
that it isn't a replacement for CRUD,
it is a different use.
If CRUD works for your domain, leave it alone.
There are times, however,
where you find yourself in this use case
and the pain of CQRS may be worth a try.
And in my sole attempt, I can tell you that it was painful.
And this was a demo application,
not a real production system.
Now, I want to warn you,
this is a very simplistic view,
just to show what happens at a high level.
This isn't a hard and fast prescription
for the pattern.
So we start with an update service and its database.
Now, this service uses a distinct domain model
that fits in well with its database.
Likewise, we have a read service and its database.
Again, the distinct domain model fits in well
in this case and is different from the update service.
We also have a message broker.
Now, I'm leaving out the producer and the consumer,
but they are either in the database itself
or via some triggered or event driven process.
Now the flow generally goes like this:
data is written from
the update service to the update database and acknowledged,
the update service then goes about its business.
At the same time, a message is generated
for the event and passed,
either to a message broker,
or directly to the read database asynchronously.
The message is read by a consumer,
if the message broker is used
and written to the read database in its transformed state.
This consumer may need to read other data
to achieve this new model.
Now the read service will hit the read database
and get a response in the new model.
Note, however, that this isn't immediate.
And if you decide to go this route,
this information matters.
And I will warn you once again,
that this isn't for faint of heart
and it shouldn't be forced into existence.
I am presenting it here as an overly simplified view
because it is an example of asynchronous messaging
in a microservices-based system.
It can be powerful,
but it can be expensive and error-prone.
It is, however, a great example
of how asynchronous messaging
can help solve real-world problems.